# Scheme Interpreter

In this project you will build an interpreter for a Turing-complete
subset of Racket/Scheme, including lambdas (of fixed and variable
arity), `if`, `let`, `let*`, `and`/`or`, and a set of ten primitives
over numbers and lists.

The central challenge in building an interpreter for a higher-order
(or object-oriented) language is the run-time representation of
functions (or objects, in the OOP setting). In this project, you will
follow the "closure-creating interpreter" lecture--ensure you have a
firm understanding of that lecture/video before attempting this
project. We include a bit of starter code here, as inspiration, in the
form of the function `interp-ce-lambda`. Make sure you fully
understand how `interp-ce-lambda` works before you try to construct
your solution: the way it uses environments is subtle and important.

For this project in particular, it will be crucial you know how to
read the public tests and run them on your own. I recommend starting
with the easiest tests you can possibly find: things like `(and #t
#f)`, `(+ 1 2)`, etc... before moving on to the larger test cases.

Our reference solution is roughly 40 lines of Racket, all in the
`interp-ce` function, but you may consider writing various "helper"
functions to do various things (e.g., bind variables in preparation to
call a function). Reasonable solutions would be expected to be around
50 to 150 lines of code--if you're doing way more work than that, it
probably indicates a mistaken approach. For example, multiple parts of
this project will be made easier by implementing a bulk assignment
operators to set multiple keys/values of a hash, which may be
implemented using foldl:

```
(define (assign-keys-vals h keys vals)
  (foldl (λ (k v h) (hash-set h k v)) h keys vals))
;; e.g., (assign-keys-vals (hash 'x 2 'y 3) '(x y z) '(5 2 3))
```

## The Language: Syntax

Below is the full syntax of the language you must support:

```
Primitives
prim = {+, -, *, =, equal?, cons, car, cdr, list, null?}

x is a metavariable
exp ::= (lambda (x ...) exp)         -- Fixed-arity lambda
      | (let ([x0 exp0] ...) exp)    -- let-binding
      | (let* ([x0 exp0] ...) exp)   -- "Sequenced" let
      | (and e0 ...)                 -- Polyadic and (0 or more args)
      | (or e0 ...)                  -- Polyadic or (0 or more args)
      | (exp0 ...)                   -- Function application
      | datum                        -- Datums

Extra credit (encouraged, see below):
      | (lambda x exp)               -- Arbitrary-arity lambda
      | (apply exp0 exp1)            -- Apply variadic lambda to arg list

datum:
  | '()                              -- Empty list
  | n                                -- Literal numbers
  | #t | #f                          -- Literal booleans
```

Your interpreter, `interp-ce`, must correctly interpret any valid
`scheme-ir?` program and yield the same value as it would in DrRacket,
except for closures (generated by lambdas) which must be represented
as `'(closure ,lambda ,environment)`. For example, `(+ 1 2)` must
evaluate to `3`, and `(cons 1 (cons 2 '()))` must yield `'(1 2)`. For
programs that result in a runtime error, you should return `(error
,message)---giving some reasonable string error message.  Handling
errors and some trickier cases will give bonus points.

Note that while your language does not explicitly include recursion in
its syntax, it does allow untyped lambdas, which allow recursion via a
fixed-point combinator. For example, `public-factorial` uses this
functionality to implement the factorial function using your
interpreter.

Note that to match the empty list `'()`, your match pattern should use `''()`:
```
(match (first '('())) ['() "wrong"] [''() "right"])
```

## Builtin Functions

Supporting built-in functions may be done in a variety of ways. My
reference solution takes the following strategy: construct the initial
environment so that it maps each builtin to a closure (with an empty
environment) that looks something like `'(lambda primargs (apply-prim
,op primargs)`, where `op` is the relevant primitive. This then
naturally gets applied by `interp-ce`, where I add a special case for
`apply-prim` (*not* a scheme-ir? expression), which uses Racket's
`apply` to apply the necessary function (obtained via either `(eval op
(make-base-namespace))`, or something like `(hash-ref op (hash '+ +
...))`, this is the one place using `eval` is acceptable).

You may be tempted to specifically recognize each built-in function
and handle them separately. This will kind of work, but we have some
tests that do things like this:

```
((lambda (+) (+ 1)) (lambda (x) 25))
```

Naive solutions will not account for this kind of shadowing--handling
shadowing requires that you allow builtins to live in the environment,
just as other bindings. However, you may want to start at a naive
solution if you cannot figure out a more general strategy--as this
will allow you to still pass most of the tests.

## WARNINGS and Hints

- Do *not* try to use Racket's `eval` to write the whole
  interpreter. It will not correctly produce or work with closures,
  and will thus not provide a general solution.

- Be *very careful* to understand the difference a quote
  makes. Calling `(interp-ce (let ([x (+ 1 2)]) x))` is essentially
  the same as calling `(interp-ce 3)`, i.e., you are *not even
  running* your interpreter. Instead, you want `(interp-ce '(let ([x
  (+ 1 2)]) x))`

- Make sure you handle cases where various bindings may be empty!
  Things like `(and)`, `(or)`, `(let* () 1)`, etc...

- You may want to call `interp-ce` on synthetic syntax (not present in
  the original program). For example, our reference implementation
  defines `let*` by interpreting "one let at a time," and finishing up
  in the `(let () ,body)` case. Doing this can avoid a *lot* of work!

- You don't need to worry about errors unless you want to pass some of
  the harder bonus tests. If you want to try those, consider using
  Racket's `with-handlers`.

- Use `foldl` to accumulate an environment and bind variables. You
  will likely need to do this in `let*`, `let`, and application (but
  likely not with `apply`)

- To evaluate a function, evaluate each of its arguments, bind them
  into variables, and then evaluate the body with the new environment
  (updated with bindings for each argument).

- To `apply` a function, evaluate each of its arguments, and then bind
  them (as a list) to the necessary variable.

- If you support `apply`: be careful to match the closure's lambda to
  determine whether you need to construct a list or bind named
  arguments.

- Be careful to think about the difference between `let` and
  `let*`. At some point, you will need to iterate over the bindings to
  translate them into values before you create a new environment: in
  the case of `let` you need to reference the *original* environment,
  in the case of `let*` you need to *accumulate* an environment. Both
  of these can be done with `foldl`, but some care must be taken to
  ensure the correct behavior.
